# ZCC
ZCC is a toy C compiler written entirely in Rust!

This project does not aim to be a fully-fledged compiler
for the C language, as this would be a monumental endeavor
that I currently do not have the time for. Instead, it 
is an opportunity for me to explore Rust and low-level
programming  concepts. Through ZCC, I aim to deepen my understanding of:

* **Language Semantics**, through the lexer & parser modules of ZCC
* **Compiler Design**, through the multiple transpilation and syntax-tree passes
* **x86 Assembly**, in code output generated by ZCC
* **Rust Programming** as the primary language of ZCC

> [!NOTE]
> The development of ZCC was conceptually guided by Nora Sandler's
> "How to Build a C Compiler", No Starch Press Inc, 2024.
> However, the implementation of ZCC's functionality is independent
> and unique from the book.

### Current functionality
* Unary operators (`~` and `-`)
* Number literals
* The `main` function
* Returning values

### Planned
* Binary operators
* Logical operators
* Local variables
* Conditionals
* Loops

## Installing & Running
Installation is simple:
```shell
$ git clone https://github.com/diogoos/zcc && cd zcc
$ cargo build 
```

To generate the debug logs for the compiler, build with the followin
feature flag instead:
```shell
$ cargo build -F debug_verbose
```

Here’s an example `program.c` file to use:
```C
int main(void) {
    return ~(-3);
}
```

And, after running `zcc program.c --codegen -S`, we get the
(very unoptimized) output of:
```assembly
	.globl _main
_main:
	pushq	%rbp
	movq	%rsp, %rbp
	subq	$8, %rsp
	movl	$3, -4(%rbp)
	negl	-4(%rbp)
	movl	-4(%rbp), %r10d
	movl	%r10d, -8(%rbp)
	notl	-8(%rbp)
	movl	-8(%rbp), %eax
	movq	%rbp, %rsp
	popq	%rbp
	ret
```

ZCC relies on GCC to link the assembly output and generate
an executable (for now…). The full compilation workflow can be
run simply using as follows:
```shell
$ zcc program.c
$ ./program
$ echo $? # prints 2
```

More information about the ZCC command line tool options can be found by running
```shell
$ zcc --help
```

## How it works

ZCC is currently divided into four components, each responsible for a different
role within the compilation workflow.
1. **[Lexer](./src/lex)**: The lexer is responsible for scanning the raw source code and converting it into a sequence
of tokens. Each token represents a basic syntactic unit, such as a keyword, identifier, literal, operator.
2. **[The abstract syntax tree](./src/ast)**: AST is a hierarchical representation of the program's structure. It is
an intermediate representation that reflects the grammatical structure of the source code. Syntax checking, semantic 
analysis and optimization occur during this pass.
3. **[ZCC Intermediate Language (ZIL)](./src/zil)**: ZIL is a intermediary representation between the high-level
AST and the final assembly code. 
4. **[Assembly generation & output](./src/assembly)**: The assembly generation component is responsible for taking the
intermediate ZIL representation and converting it into machine-specific assembly code, which is then linked using GCC.

## LICENSE
Copyright 2024 Diogo Silva

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
